[Music]
welcome to my
sky tonight presentation of the 1st
of 2021 so
we have the sky set up here for the
evening of the 20th of january
2021 and i'm going to show you the sort
of objects
that we'll be able to see now you've
already seen the moon there presented
for you
roughly half phase and now the sky is
beginning to get dark at
half past seven at night the moonless in
the center of the screen
and just to this side of it we have a
very red looking object
which is of course the planet mars which
we'll have a look at in a moment
i'm just going to pull back and show you
the whole of the sky
a little bit of the twilight left there
still down to the side
and put the constellations of the zodiac
that mark out the path of the planets
across the sky
onto the screen for you so we have
aquarius there down in the twilight
pisces aries where mars is
next up taurus the bull
and then of course we move across the
sky to gemini
the twins and finally cancer
and these constellations all line up
across the sky because
they are the path of the planets this is
the
line of the ecliptic this orange line
here
this is the line that matches the path
of the sun
as it marches around the sky but also is
followed by the planets because the
solar system
is basically a flat disc so you can see
there the moon
just to one side of it and mars there in
very orangey color was just next to that
uh plane of the ecliptic so we're going
to zoom in on mars now
we'll dive right in and we can see the
planet there
and it's two little tiny moons phobos
and demos
those are very quite tricky to observe
so don't be surprised if you don't see
them
you need really quite uh professional
level of equipment to actually pick
those guys up
but if we zoom in a bit further on to
the disc of mars you'll immediately see
that it is not showing a perfect circle
at the moment
we've gone past it we're well ahead of
mars around our orbit now we passed it
in september
not what's called opposition when it was
directly opposite the sun in the sky
and the earth was in a line in the
center we're beginning to lose the
ability to see the detail on it then but
it's still very bright in the sky
i've picked this particular night
because just below mars in the sky
we can use it as a sign place to find
the planet
uranus which is not normally one that's
easy to track down it's
just about visible with the naked eye
but extremely difficult to find
telescope reveals it to be a small pale
greenish white
disc and you can usually find a
collection of its moons
scattered around it this is because
they're orbiting around
in the plane of the equator of uranus
but that
is not pointing towards us it's very
much
laid out as if we're looking down on the
pole at the moment
and so we see the faint rings of uranus
there around the planet
and its moons all arrayed around
in a group around the outside
now we'll go and have a look at one
that's one of those moons titania in a
little bit close up detail
if we can we'll zoom in as far as
possible
and these moons collection of about five
large moons that have been known for
a few hundred years and these are all
decent sized planet-sized objects
themselves round with their gravity and
several of them are good candidates for
having
oceans underneath a protected ice crust
and therefore of interest as possible
habitable zones for
simple life forms so as for the
potential for life
even out there in the uh cold regions of
space
now we've pulled right back and we're
going to move to the left a bit towards
the
constellation of orion there and the
bright star
sirius just risen above the horizon as
we're letting time
slew forward to 9 pm just to bring those
constellations well into view
we've also got the milky way there and
here we have
the very famous constellation of ursa
major
the plow or the great bear there's the
stick diagram of the bear with his nose
at the top of the screen
and his paws sticking out to the right
tail dropping off the bottom of the
screen
there there is the artwork for the great
bear
ursa major
it's a very large constellation i think
it is in fact the largest scree
total sky area of any constellation
now if we look at one or two of the
objects in the middle of the tail of the
great bear
we've got the double star mizar with its
companion
alcor there and you can see those as two
separate objects with the naked eye
very much easier with binoculars or a
small telescope but with a very very
powerful telescope we can drill
right in on mizar and discover that it
itself
is a double star and if we did the same
trick with
alcor we would also find that that was
double
so we have two pairs of stars where the
overall pairs are orbiting around each
other making a
quadruple star system now just off to
the left of the
tail of the great bear we can find the
first galaxy on our tour
and that's the pinwheel galaxy
this is a classic spiral galaxy you can
really see the spiral arms in a
beautiful image here
bringing the hubble high resolution
image shows it in great detail
you can see the nucleus in the middle
and how the spiral arms
wind around the outside
that's about 20 million light years away
from us
so it's not the nearest galaxy but it's
in one of the
groups that's fairly nearby to us living
in the milky way galaxy here
so that's the pinwheel galaxy if we go
the other side of the tail of the great
bear
we find the whirlpool galaxy again a
face
on spiral but this time it's in the
process of devouring its
neighboring dwarf galaxy you can see how
there's a bridge of stars between the
two
and the dwarf galaxy is getting
disrupted by the gravity of its large
neighbor
and that's how gravities grow they
they're cannibalistic the
large gravities eat the smaller ones and
grow
larger and the larger they grow the more
gravity they have
so they're able to pull in further
objects
also in the great bear we're going to
have a look at the owl nebula
so called because it resembles the face
of an owl when you look at it through a
telescope
it's a called a planetary nebula but
it's nothing to do with planets it's the
remains of a dying star
a sun-like star has come to the end of
its life
and puffed off its outer atmosphere to
leave behind
just the exposed white dwarf
dead nuclear core another galaxy here
this one's a little bit further away
45 million light years and again it's a
spiral galaxy
viewed as a bit of an edge-on angle here
so
harder to make out the spiral arms
so we'll pull back away from there and
go the other side of the main part of
the bowl of the big dipper or the plow
you can see that on the screen there the
four brightest stars
we're going to go up to the left now
find another little group of galaxies
the largest one here is bodes galaxy
and this is about ten and a half million
light years away from us so
relatively close by it's a spiral galaxy
and
roughly the same as the milky way
but just next to it is the cigar galaxy
which is also a spiral galaxy but you
can see right in the center
a tremendous amount of activity jets of
material
shooting out from the core this is
because it had a near miss
with its larger neighbor bodes galaxy
about six million years ago
and the tidal disruption of the gravity
of its stronger neighbor
has caused all that activity to be
triggered off
so there was bodes galaxy and the cigar
galaxy
now we're going to look at the little
bear ursa major
i'm sorry ursa minor we've looked at
ursa major already
very similar in shape to ursa major with
the
bowl shape and the spoon handle sticking
out there
supposed to be the tail of the little
bear there he is
and the poor little bear gets swung
around the sky by his tail because the
star at the tip of the tail there is
polaris
the pole star you can always see that
from the northern latitudes
certainly from cambridge it's always in
the same place
because it's aligned with the rotation
axis of the earth
so as the earth spins underneath it
polaris seems to stay still
polaris is a very useful star to
astronomers in other ways as well
it's a special kind of star a yellow
supergiant
a cepheid variable as it's called to
give its technical name
and these are very useful for estimating
distances
in the sky and working out how far away
the stars are
now i'm allowing time to spin around and
just to illustrate the point that
polaris stays still and the whole sky
rotates around it as time moves on
you can see the rotation of the earth
carrying all the other stars
in a circle around polaris and i could
also run time backwards of course so
we'll run that back to 9pm where we were
so that we leave things set up for the
next constellation
and bring the little bear back to where
it started
you can see that's down leading away the
tail leading the way down from polaris
down towards the square of the little
bear there
so back to 9 p.m so we'll pull back away
from polaris now
and go back to some of the
constellations
of the winter sky and this is the
constellation of taurus the bull
we have the v-shape of the face of
taurus
he has two enormous horns which stick up
to the left there
and his body and back are
indicated out to the right but the rear
half of the ball is completely missing
there's the artwork that shows that
if one of his eyes is marked out by
aldebaran the red eye of the bull a very
uh bright orangey red giant star here
this is a star a bit more massive than
the sun
has reached the end of its life and is
about to
turn into one of those planetary nebulae
but here's the opposite end of the life
cycle of stars this is a much
younger star cluster called the pleiades
or the seven sisters
only about 150 million years old
which is nothing for stars we could see
some hot
bright blue stars there lighting up the
remains of the gas
out of which the star cluster was formed
there's a really good thing to look at
with binoculars
it makes a perfect framed image for them
because they're quite large on the sky
overwater the tip of one of the horns of
the bull we have an exploded star
a supernova remnant this is the crab
nebula right in the center is a spinning
neutron star
giving out pulses of radio waves
so-called pulsar
that we detect those pulses coming to
the earth each time the
star rotates and uh it does so pretty
rapidly about
30 times a second so it's quite an
amazing
thing to think about now we're going to
look
down below taurus to orion the hunter
you can see orion's belt there the three
stars in the middle
there's orion with taurus up to the
right and gemini that you see the feet
of the twins of gemini
up to the left
just below the
constellation of taurus and we drill
into it
and we find the bright orange red
coloured star betelges
this has been misbehaving for the last
12 months
and fading and coming back again in
brightness and giving scientists
a lot of reason to scratch their head we
think it's going to explode as a
supernova
anytime in the next million years or so
but we're not quite sure when
so this misbehavior got people very
excited
but it seems to have calmed down again
now
right in the center of the orion it's
the sword handle
and it contains this amazing orion
nebula
a stellar star factory or star nursery
where new stars have been born out of a
cocoon
of gas and dust and the four bright ones
right in the center there that you can't
make out
are lighting up the whole of the rest of
that with their extreme radiation
giving those beautiful red and pink
colors and the brown dirty dusty
material
it's the colder material that's yet to
collapse
and form new stars and new solar systems
so that's the main orion nebula
wonderful sight in binoculars
now we're going to look just to the star
at the left hand of the trio
of orion's belt and zoom in a little bit
here
and we see another couple of regions of
glowing gas
we see the horse head nebula where the
red
pink color of her glowing hydrogen
has a cold dark dusty finger of gas
and dust blocking it making that shape
of the
head of a horse or perhaps a seahorse
would be a better description
and also the flame nebula there just to
the left of the star
now ryan is full of these clouds of gas
and dust you can see a big red
finger of it over to the left hand side
curling across the screen
and here's another region where a young
star
formed out of these dirty dusty material
has lit up and is reflecting its blue
light
back off the gas behind what's called a
reflection nebula we can't actually see
the bright star
because the thick dirty dusty material
is obscuring it
we can see the light bouncing back to us
all sorts of interesting objects in and
around this area
but that's at the end of the show for
tonight it's
uh just uh 20 minutes there is a lot
more to see
but i don't want to make these uh
planetarium shows go on for too long
so we'll bring that to a close there now
and i'll just leave you with a view
up into the sky there's the
constellation of auriga
with the bright star cappella and capela
is the name
of our cambridge astronomical
association newsletter
so if you google caa capella you can
find our newsletters online
and learn more about the night sky
thank you very much for watching do
click subscribe and you'll get notified
when the next one